---
date: '2025-11-01T17:22:50+05:30'
draft: false
title: 'An Experience with Quantum Groups'
description : 'In this blog I talk about my experience of studying quantum groups during my summer internship with Dr. Pachol in the summer of 2025.' 
tags :
category : 
series:
showWordCount: true
showReadingTime: true
---

<div style="text-align: justify;">
I started learning mathematics and physics rigorously, about 5 years ago. Before that, the two subjects always seemed quite distant. Mathematics felt like an abstract world with every problem posing a new puzzle for me to solve. At the same time I was enamoured by the beautiful explanations that physics had to offer about world around us. When I first learned mechanics, I was fascinated to see how these ideas developed in mathematics were indispensable tools when it came to describing the physical world. Soon after, I learned about calculus of variations and Hamiltonian mechanics. While Newtonian mechanics definitely provided a surprising application of the mathematics I had learned, Hamiltonian mechanics opened up an entire new world where incredibly abstract ideas, which at first seemed like had nothing to do with the real world, described it so elegantly. The interaction between these two subjects is what made learning them a memorable experience. While the fascination of physics was present, without the mathematics it wouldn't have felt nearly as beautiful. This experience prompted me to explore interactions between mathematics and other subjects when I started college two years ago. I had loved reading about evolutionary biology, when I realised that this field had much mathematics to offer, I was immediately attracted to it. 

Last summer, I had done an internship on mathematical biology, in particular, on modelling long term evolution in a bacterial system. When I compare that experience with this internship quite a few differences come to mind. In particular, when I was studying mathematical biology, it always seemed as if there was something missing in this experience. It was surely fascinating but lacked the kind of abstraction I had seen when in physics. With certain exceptions, the joy of finding the most unexpected logic was missing, contrary to my experience of studying physics. It felt as though I had to choose between my infatuation and my love for abstraction. A few months passed by with me in this dilemma, when I started searching for internship for the upcoming summer. I was determined to learn something I hadn't explored before. After my relatively disappointing experience with mathematical biology, I figured I might as well go back to physics. I wanted to explore the interest I had in particle physics as a teenager, but this time, from a mathematical lens. As I was looking for people, I came across Dr. Pachol's Google scholar page. While her work was far from what I had in mind at the time, the term 'quantum groups' caught my eye. I had never heard of this topic before, but I knew that I loved both quantum physics and group theory so it was quite natural that I wanted to explore this topic. Even though at the time I didn't understand what her research was about, it had intrigued me quite a lot. After correspondence over email, we decided on a project plan to be started from 12th May. 

In the initial stages this project was certainly very overwhelming, I was learning about objects that I had never seen before through books that I wasn't fully able to follow. Even though at times I felt like giving up, I stayed determined to understand the subject. This was vastly different from the project that I had worked on before, when I was working on mathematical biology, the mathematics itself was quite simple and easier to follow, albeit slightly uninteresting. But this internship was a far different story, even though the mathematics was quite overwhelming at first, it had a way of roping me in. I would give up for the day and just a few moments later I would find myself out of bed back on my desk late at night. The material was challenging in just the right aspects, I constantly felt drawn towards it. Even when I wasn't studying, I would constantly find myself trying to make sense of what I had read, whether I was out for a walk or having dinner. I haven't felt this engrossed into a topic in a long while now; although it may sound like an exaggeration, it is quite truthful to say that I hadn't felt this alive in quite some time. All the things that I craved for during my last internship were present this time, there was constantly a puzzle on my mind. I was engaged in a manner I hadn't experienced in years. 

Academically, of course, I got to learn a lot. All those things have been mentioned throughout this report. But more than that, this internship taught me a lot of things about my study habits themselves. One of the primary reason that during the initial two weeks the content was so overwhelming was due to my perfectionist attitude towards my studies. Prior to this, I was the student who would study every tiny aspect in excruciating detail, to the extent that I would often find myself chasing tangents that were never really relevant to what I was learning. To give a slightly extreme example of this, when I was learning calculus, I ended up embarking on a two week long journey of studying propositional logic just so I could understand what the symbols \( \forall , \exists \) meant in the definition of a limit. I realised that while this approach did help me understand certain concepts and motivation for topics better, it was far from practical. Once I realised this, I made myself keep certain questions in a black-box and return to them later. I was no longer reading through an entire textbook of Lie algebras just to understand the motivation behind the definition; rather I learned to take certain definitions 'on faith' as being useful and progress with what was most relevant to me at the time. Learning only the ideas and tools directly relevant to me was an important skill I acquired. I could always return to this black-box later on and try to answer those questions. This made learning new things significantly easier and the project a lot less overwhelming. 

This was certainly the important learning experience I had from this internship, often not chasing tangents is the best way to learn something even though at times definitions do feel unmotivated. In fact, once I was confident with the basics I returned to this black-box and was able to answer many questions on my own. For example, in the beginning of the project tensor products felt quite mysterious, but once I was comfortable working with them, I was able to appreciate how useful they are. When I later learned about tensor products in more detail, it felt a lot easier to understand the material than when I had tried during the first week. Abandoning this perfectionist approach was essential to the main purpose of the project, which was understanding the research paper. When I was reading the paper, there were many concepts that weren't familiar to me, as such I only focused on the main ideas of the paper. This taught me how to read scientific papers as well. I am pretty sure that had I not abandoned my initial attitudes towards studies, I would've tried to go through every citation to understand the material, which of course wasn't necessary at all.  

Another thing I realised is how important it is to revisit the topics you have learned later on. At the end of the internship when I revisited my notes I was able to appreciate the relationship between various concepts far better than before. Counter-intuitively, not chasing perfectionism made me understand the material much better. These are some of the learnings that I intend to implement in my future studies as well. After the duration of the internship period I also went through certain sections of the textbooks and read about the things that I found interesting at a first glance. I got the impression that quantum groups are situated quite nicely in the intersection of pure mathematics and mathematical physics, as such, I am even more eager to explore this vast field further. 

Overall, this project was incredibly beneficial for me in a lot of ways. I got to learn a lot academically but also a lot about professional scientific communication. While I was familiar with certain aspects of \( \LaTeX \) before, during this project I learned a lot more packages such as tikz and beamer. I am incredibly grateful to Dr. Pachol for providing me opportunity as well as a nurturing environment where I could learn all these things.


</div>