---
date: '2025-10-29T14:51:03+05:30'
draft: false
title: 'Exploration of Morality as a Class Conflict'
description: The following essay was written for a take-home exam assigned by my humanities instructor where we had to explain the concept of class in the context of some social conflict. 
category : ["Sociology"]
tags:
    - sociology
    - psuedoscience
showReadingTime: true
showWordCount: true
---

<div style="text-align: justify;">

In this essay I try to elucidate the concept of class, albeit in an unconventional manner. Usually when we discuss class, we do so in the context of socioeconomic hierarchy; in this essay, I want to take the abstract essence of the concept of a class, and use this abstraction to analyze a social conflict to get a solid understanding of what it means for something to be a class, to get understand how the concept of class helps us understand social conflicts. Another reason for choosing a rather unconventional process to elucidate the scope of this concept, is my own personal bias towards the intersection of science and social sciences; feminism and religion in particular.

A society is comprised of its constituents, the people. Each of these individuals has their own unique identity, their own moral compass and held values, which are rarely disjoint. One observes that in the society there seems to exist a *moral superiority -* certain morals are deemed to be better than others. While moral superiority in the form “I am better than you because I do not kill people” is quite unsurprising, a less obvious example would be that of conflicting ideologies and religions; where even though numerous of the held values of shared, one perceives themselves as being superior to the other group purely by the virtue of belonging to their religion. An important distinction to be made between this moral conflict of two religions and socioeconomic hierarchy is that of acceptance of the hierarchy - socioeconomic hierarchy is universally accepted by all the constituents, there are no doubts that having more wealth puts you higher up on the ladder. However, in the case of this moral superiority there isn’t a universally accepted hierarchy, rather each side believes they are the superior ones. This gives rise to sharp divide in the society, as the primary point of contention is also the source of recognition, whereas in socioeconomic hierarchy the recognition is tied solely with wealth, the class struggle in this case is one to move up the ladder for higher recognition, and to fight against the oppression by the bourgeoisie. This stark difference between two religious groups permeates throughout the society, and even when the two groups have many similar values, one group is not willing to concede that to the other by fear of losing their supposed hierarchy and thus recognition. 

Having set the domain in which we will be working - conflict based on moral hierarchy between religion A and B (which can be extended to religion and secular people) - I would now like to spend some time discussing the importance and the necessity of the definition of class, as well as explain what class really means. Let us consider the distribution of constituents between the two extremes of the population. We can observe that people aren’t uniformly dispersed between the two ends, the two ends being fundamentalist religion A and fundamentalist religion B; rather the distribution is denser along some point on this spectrum than others. While there is no denying that between any two points on this spectrum, there always is an individual lying between them; in practice this means that the conflict between religious ideologies ends up becoming the conflict between the people who adhere to one or the other. If the distribution was uniform between these two extremes, we would hardly see any serious conflicts; but due to this ‘clustering effect’ where some points on the spectrum are denser than others, the conflict becomes more apparent as the differences get larger between these two groups as the battle for recognition becomes increasingly tense. Thus, in practicality, the conflict plays itself not as a conflict between numerous individuals, rather a conflict between two players - the players being the ‘cluster’ formed by people. 

When analyzing any conflict, understanding the players themselves is an important part, as their differences give rise to the said conflict. The players play a central role in the conflict. As such it is only natural to start the study of these conflicts by understanding the structuring of these ‘clusters’. We refer to these ‘clusters’ formed due to social divisions as **class**. While players are an important aspect of any conflict, a conflict is not defined by just the players involved - we also need to understand the factors due to which conflict persists. In the Marxist theory, the driver of any conflict is the surplus of labor. As we shall see, in this example too, it is the surplus of labor that drives the conflict, however we surplus labor in a rather unconventional form. 

While I have spent a lot of time discussing the concept of a class, and highlighting the important points of it, I have barely given any physical processes in which we see these concepts take form. Just to summarize, concepts of social hierarchy and conflict are imperative to understanding class. In understanding conflict, we need to talk about the factors driving the conflict - surplus labor. In this essay I set up the stage to be a society which is divided into classes on the basis of religious ideology - for simplicity we shall consider conflict between secular group and a religiously conservative group. To take a real example, I would like to roll back time to 1960s United States, where Christianity is prevalent. Ideas pertaining to sex and sexualities are considered to be taboo and obscene. I would like to take the example of research done by William Masters and Virginia Johnson on human sexual activities. In particular their research on female orgasms which debunked many widespread believes in the society at the time, which also incidentally happen to be one of the driving forces for the sexual revolution that took place in the Western world in 60s and 70s. One of the many difficulties that Masters and Johnson faced was convincing their colleagues and peers that their work was indeed worthy of attention and not pornographic in nature. 

When one is confronted with a differences in ideologies in reference to moral superiority, actions, beliefs and information that informs them takes the place that labor has in a capitalist society under a socioeconomic hierarchy. Neither of the players can agree to the other one’s beliefs as that would mean surrendering your perceived moral high ground. In an attempt to not have their beliefs enforced by the moral bourgeoisie, we see an uprising by the oppressed to fight for recognition, which in this example took the form of sexual liberation movement. Here, surplus labor is the ‘extra’ labor that one has to put in, to convince others of their idea. This extra efforts goes into dismantling the other’s dogma and preconceived ill informed notions of your ideas. This surplus labor gives rise to the conflict that we observe, by making an attempt to liberate its subjects, while the oppressors label these actions, beliefs, and information as being rebellious and ‘going against the held values of the society’. We observe this surplus labor in the example of Masters and Johnson in the form of them having to fight against the stigma related to sex and sexuality.

Another interesting thing to note is another form that this surplus labor takes which can be seen very apparently in today’s world. The religious majority in an attempt to gain the recognition either rejects modern thoughts and advancements (anti vaccine movement) or instills its dogma more prominently in the society (recognition of alternative medicine by the government of India - formation of AYUSH ministry). Here, the surplus labor goes not into convincing others to take your work seriously, not into destroying the stigma surrounding it, but into dismantling the existing incorrect ideas about objective information, and then educating people with correct information. The surplus labor increases by an order of magnitude! 

As such we see that the concept of class is imperative to understand the conflict in any social situation, be it socioeconomic conflict or moral superiority. The power of this concept lies not just in its ability to explain conflicts, but also in its abstraction that allows us to extend it from conventional socioeconomic factors to others. Quite counterintuitively, it is the abstraction, a step away from concrete formulation that allows us to explain ideas concretely!

</div>