---
date: '2025-10-31T16:49:58+05:30'
draft: false
title: 'Syntactics vs Semantics of Mathematics'
description: 'In this essay, I analyse the meaning of mathematics. In a system where the syntactics - methodology of rigor and proofs is given the most importance, where does the semantics lie?'
tags:
    - Mathematics
---

<div style="text-align: justify;">

In this essay, I want to ponder over ‘meaning’ in the setting of abstraction. It seems contradictory at first, isn’t abstraction the very process of stripping reality of its meaning? That maybe a question for another day, but no, that’s not my aim here. My aim is to understand on a surface level what it means to assign meaning to this abstraction. 

Mathematics to me, is and forever will be a fantasy world to get lost in, much like a child creates his imaginary world and spends their day ruminating and fighting monsters. However, this imaginary world nuanced, one where we cannot just rewrite millennia of effort just based on a whim or a general dislike. It’s rules are well defined, often difficult to understand and even harder to internalise. 

On the surface, it seems as if its just a bunch of definitions, followed by theorems and proofs. Much is to blame on mathematical exposition for this conceptualisation, but I must not digress. Even though it is simply a series of logical steps based off of previous results, there’s a richness that cannot quite be captured by words, yet anyone who enjoys mathematics is familiar with it. A mere symbolic manipulation doesn’t feel quite as thrilling as a proof which introduces new definitions and ideas. One can disregard this observation as simply a matter of preference, or one could ask, what makes them different? After all, both are just using well defined rules to manipulate statements and results to conclude new ones. From this perspective the proof of the first isomorphism theorem for groups isn’t much different than say, proving a certain identity involving binomial coefficients. One may argue that they differ in their applications, combinatorial identities may not be particularly useful however the importance of first isomorphism theorem is well accepted. 

I refuse to accept this as a valid reason. Surely, the problems we choose to solve determine what is of importance and what isn’t. However, historically, the problems have always been in some ways instructed by the human nature — in my view, it is a mere coincidence that we solve the problems that we do, for if we were different beings, perhaps we would have vastly different fields of pure mathematics which we would be interested in. If we consider the set of all results which can be derived from the ZFC axioms (we will assume them to be consistent), then it is natural to assume that the restriction of this set to something like calculus should be of equal magnitude as something much more “unimportant” as say, mathematical way of tying shoe laces. This is simply because one can always derive more results based off of the previous one. One can conceptualise a machine which just uses axioms and established results to produce new ones. What is to say one of these machines will stop before another? It is only a matter of human interest that we select one of these over the other. With this in mind, one is faced with the question once again — what makes one important and the other one, not so much? 

I will attempt to answer this question but first, I must take a small detour. Currently, I have been crediting a course called “Set Theory and Logic”. The instructor since the very beginning stressed the importance between semantics and syntactics. In the beginning this seemed like a pointless distinction, why does it even matter in the grand scheme of things? The subtlety of the definition was lost on me, until recently. What exactly is syntactics? It is the study of how we manipulate symbols, how we draw valid inferences, what makes a proof “correct”. Whereas semantics help us ascribe meaning to our ‘universe’ as we called it in class. Now, let us unpack what this means. 

Consider any book — preferably something which is typically considered as profound, say works of Dostoevsky or Camus. The beauty of these works do not lie simply in the way letters are arranged, but the way they speak to the reader and everyone is left with a different experience after reading the book. The author forces you to fight with your emotions, to introspect, to question. But at the end of the day, aren’t these just strings of letters? This is the difference between semantics and syntactics. Syntactics ensures that we have valid strings, whereas semantics helps us interpret it. 

Simple enough eh? What does this have to do with mathematics? Let us think back to our previous example, say we had a proof of the Riemann hypothesis and another proof which involves some standard symbolic manipulation and provides us with a new identity involving binomial coefficients. Without a doubt, everyone would find the proof of Riemann hypothesis to be far more interesting, presumably not just because it is unsolved for so long, but also because as the general expectation goes, it would introduce new concepts, new profound theorems and open up a new field of investigation, much like Wiles did with Fermat’s last theorem. But now consider the computers from before, they will see both these proofs as simply syntactical writings. To them, what should make one more interesting than the other? 

The point I wish to highlight is that mathematics is incomplete without semantics. Any result is meaningless without its interpretation, or its contextualisation in the grand tapestry of human ambitions. There’s no inherent importance that any theorem carries, it is ascribed by us due to its ability to aid us in our goals. Much like how differential geometry was once irrelevant to physicists until they discovered that it could be used to understand the universe. Did the field change? Over time yes, but back then, it was the same to physicists and mathematicians alike. But the difference in their ambitions changed the importance of the same entity, which further proves how semantics has the power to shape our understanding and vision of the world. Without the motivation, without the grander picture in mind, why would we engage in Langland’s program? Why would we engage in a theory of quantum gravity? Isn’t it because we hope that it would solve our questions, satisfy our thirst? Inevitably, we end up contextualising the field in the tapestry of our ambitions. ambitions. 

Mathematics is meaningless without the underlying motivation, the long term vision and the sight of the Great Ones, such as Grothendiek, Langland and many more, which paved the direction of exploration in this vast forest. While undoubtedly, syntactics is important, it is rendered meaningless without the interpretation. This strongly suggests the changes we need to make in our pedagogy, in mathematics exposition. Not to train computers who could write proofs but people who could interpret and ascribe meaning.

</div>